Wound healing is a complex process that involves the coordinated response
of various cells to restore tissue integrity and function.
The process can be divided into several overlapping phases:
hemostasis, inflammation, proliferation, and maturation.
In the hemostasis phase, the body activates its emergency repair system, the blood clotting system.
Blood forms a clot that plugs the damaged blood vessel wall to stop the bleeding
and builds up a provisional matrix for wound healing.
It is the initial response to an injury within the first few minutes.
The inflammation phase focuses on wound cleansing.
White blood cells, mainly neutrophils, enter the wound to destroy bacteria and foreign bodies and remove debris.
Further types of white blood cells called macrophages also help to remove debris and facilitate tissue repair.
This phase usually lasts 4 to 6 days and is often associated with swelling, heat, pain and redness.
After the inflammation phase, the skin is ready to regenerate, starting with the granulation tissue.
The proliferation phase is responsible for building up more granulation tissue, wound contraction and epithelialization.
During granulation, fibroblasts fill the wound bed and build connective tissue.
New blood vessels are formed that supply nutrients to the healing tissue.
Myofibroblasts initiate wound contraction.
During epithelialization, the wound surface is covered by epithelial cells.
The newly grown tissue is still very fragile at this stage and can easily be torn open again.
The proliferation phase often lasts 3 to 21 days.
The last phase of the healing process is the maturation phase.
This is where the remodeling begins.
The scar tissue is reorganized to provide optimum tensile strength.
The scar becomes flatter and more flexible.
After complete healing, the tissue regains 80% of its former strength.
The maturation phase can last from 21 days to 2 years.